chore(ci): add contributing instructions (#2082)
zama-ai/tfhe-rs: CONTRIBUTING.md

# Contributing to tfhe-rs

> There are two ways to contribute to tfhe-rs:

Reviewer: I think this should be **TFHE-rs** ? (same for the other occurrences)

Author: Done.
<!-- Reviewable comment -OJSa5nSDNSKpbqGuShn:b-896fix -->
<!-- Sent from Reviewable.io -->

## 7. Continuous Integration

Several tests suites are executed automatically before being able to merge a pull-request.

```mermaid
---
title: Continuous Integration Process
---
sequenceDiagram
    autonumber
    
    participant Contributor
    participant GitHub
    participant Reviewer
    participant CI-pipeline
    
    Contributor ->> GitHub: Open pull-request
    GitHub -->> Contributor: Ask for CLA signing (once) 
    loop
        Reviewer ->> GitHub: Review code
        Reviewer ->> CI-pipeline: Approve workflows (short-run)
        CI-pipeline -->> GitHub: Send checks results
        Contributor ->> GitHub: Make changes
    end
    Reviewer ->> GitHub: Pull-request approval    
    Reviewer ->> CI-pipeline: Approve workflows (long-run)
    CI-pipeline -->> GitHub: Send checks results
    Reviewer -->> GitHub: Merge if pipeline green
```

>Useful details
>* pipeline is triggered by humans
>* review team is located in Paris timezone, pipeline launch will most likely happen during office hours
>* direct changes to CI related files are not allowed for external contributors
>* run `make pcc` to fix any build errors before pushing commits

> # Data versioning

Author: Done.
<!-- Reviewable comment -OJSZpiD9vdxojGJkva1:b-896fix -->
<!-- Sent from Reviewable.io -->

Data serialized with TFHE-rs should be backward compatible. This is done with the [tfhe-versionable](https://crates.io/crates/tfhe-versionable) crate.
If you modify a type that derives `Versionize` in a way that is not backward compatible, you should add an upgrade to that type.

For example, these changes are data breaking:
- Adding a field to a struct,
- changing the order of the fields within a struct or the variants within an enum,
- renaming a field of a struct or a variant of an enum,
- changing the type of a field in a struct or a variant in an enum.

On the contrary, these changes are *not* data breaking:

> - Renaming a type (though if it implements the `Named' trait, it can be),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Renaming a type (though if it implements the `Named` trait, it can be),
```

Author: Done.
<!-- Reviewable comment -OJS_6uw-xx-i2RHBGcU:b-896fix -->
<!-- Sent from Reviewable.io -->

- adding a variant to the end of an enum

Here is a quick example of how to do this.
Suppose you want to add a new i32 field to a type named `MyType`.

For example, you want to change this:
```rust
#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize, Versionize)]
#[versionize(MyTypeVersions)]
struct MyType {
  val: u64,
}
```
into this:
```rust
#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize, Versionize)]
#[versionize(MyTypeVersions)]
struct MyType {
  val: u64,
  other_val: i32
}
```

> 1. Navigate to the definition of the dispatch enum of this type. This is the type inside the `#[versionize(MyTypeVersions)]` macro attribute. In general, this type has the same name as the base type with a `Versions' suffix. You should find something like

Reviewer: I made a mistake with a backtick:
```suggestion
1. Navigate to the definition of the dispatch enum of this type. This is the type inside the `#[versionize(MyTypeVersions)]` macro attribute. In general, this type has the same name as the base type with a `Versions` suffix. You should find something like
```

Author: Done.
<!-- Reviewable comment -OJS_NR30MHVzftTBQG2:b-896fix -->
<!-- Sent from Reviewable.io -->

# Contributing to TFHE-rs

This document provides guidance on how to contribute to **TFHE-rs**.

There are two ways to contribute:

- **Report issues:** Open issues on GitHub to report bugs, suggest improvements, or note typos.
- **Submit codes**: To become an official contributor, you must sign our Contributor License Agreement (CLA). Our CLA-bot will guide you through this process when you open your first pull request.

## 1. Setting up the project

Start by [forking](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/working-with-forks/fork-a-repo) the **TFHE-rs** repository.

{% hint style="info" %}
- **Rust version**:  Ensure that you use a Rust version >= 1.81 to compile **TFHE-rs**.

> - **Incompatibility**: aarch64-based machines are not yet supported for Windows as it's currently missing an entropy source to be able to seed the [CSPRNGs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptographically_secure_pseudorandom_number_generator) used in **TFHE-rs**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Incompatibility**: AArch64-based machines are not yet supported for Windows as it's currently missing an entropy source to be able to seed the [CSPRNGs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptographically_secure_pseudorandom_number_generator) used in **TFHE-rs**.
```

> - **Performance**: for optimal performance, it is highly recommended to run **TFHE-rs** code in release mode with cargo's `--release` flag.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Performance**: For optimal performance, it is highly recommended to run **TFHE-rs** code in release mode with cargo's `--release` flag.
```

# Contributing to TFHE-rs

> 

Author: Done.
<!-- Reviewable comment -OJsjZ9u-AfWAFNv-t8J:b-896fix -->
<!-- Sent from Reviewable.io -->

There are two ways to contribute to **TFHE-rs**:

- You can open issues to report bugs, typos and suggest ideas.

> - You can become an official contributor, but you need to sign our Contributor License Agreement (CLA) on your first contribution. Our CLA-bot will guide you through the process when you will open a Pull Request on GitHub.

Author: Done.
<!-- Reviewable comment -OJsjZWN11ZmeAcIbvxf:b-896fix -->
<!-- Sent from Reviewable.io -->

## 1. Setting up the project

> You need to [fork](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/working-with-forks/fork-a-repo) the **TFHE-rs** repository.

Author: Done.
<!-- Reviewable comment -OJsj_d639MrNvMEtEiW:b-896fix -->
<!-- Sent from Reviewable.io -->

> 
> > [!Note]
> > You need to use a Rust version >= 1.81 to compile **TFHE-rs**.
> 
> > [!Note]
> > aarch64-based machines are not yet supported for Windows as it's currently missing an entropy source to be able to seed the [CSPRNGs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptographically_secure_pseudorandom_number_generator) used in **TFHE-rs**.
> 
> > [!Important]
> > **Performance**: for optimal performance, it is highly recommended to run **TFHE-rs** code in release mode with cargo's `--release` flag.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{% hint style="info" %} 

- **Rust version**:  Ensure that you use a Rust version >= 1.81 to compile **TFHE-rs**.
- **Incompatibility**: aarch64-based machines are not yet supported for Windows as it's currently missing an entropy source to be able to seed the [CSPRNGs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptographically_secure_pseudorandom_number_generator) used in **TFHE-rs**.
- **Performance**: for optimal performance, it is highly recommended to run **TFHE-rs** code in release mode with cargo's `--release` flag.
{% endhint %}
```

To get more details about the library, please refer to the [documentation](https://docs.zama.ai/tfhe-rs).

## 2. Creating a new branch

When creating your branch, make sure to use the following format :

```
git checkout -b {feat|fix|docs|chore…}/short_description
```

For example:

```
git checkout -b feat/new_feature_X
```

## 3. Before committing

### 3.1 Linting

Each commit to **TFHE-rs** should conform to the standards of the project. In particular, every source code, docker or workflows files should be linted to prevent programmatic and stylistic errors.

- Rust source code linters: `clippy`
- typescript/javascript source code linters: `eslint`, `prettier`

To apply automatic code formatting run:

```
make fmt
```

Linting of all Cargo targets can be done with:

```
make clippy_all_targets
```

### 3.2 Testing

> Your code must be well documented, provide extensive tests if any feature has been added and must not break other tests.
> 
> To execute pre-commit checks, please run the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Your contributions must include comprehensive documentation and tests without breaking existing tests. To run pre-commit checks, execute:
```

```
make pcc
```

This command ensure that all the targets in the library are building correctly.

> Alternatively, you might want to run a faster version of this command using:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a faster check, use:
```

```
make fpcc
```

> If you're contributing to GPU code, you would want to run also:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you're contributing to GPU code, run also:
```

```
make pcc_gpu
```

Unit testing suites are heavy and can require a lot of computing power and RAM availability.

> Whilst tests are run automatically in continuous integration pipeline, you can run test locally.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Whilst tests are run automatically in continuous integration pipeline, you can run tests locally.
```

All unit tests have a command formatted as:

```
make test_*
```

Run `make help` to display a list of all the commands available.

To quickly test your changes locally:
 * locate where the code has changed
 * add (or modify) a Cargo test filter to the corresponding `make` target in Makefile
 * run the target

{% hint style="success" %}

> `make test_<something>` will print the underlying cargo command in STDOUT. Changes can be quickly tested by copy/paste the command and then modify it to suit your needs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`make test_<something>` will print the underlying cargo command in STDOUT. You can quickly test your changes by copy/pasting the command and then modify it to suit your needs.
```

{% endhint %}

> 
> For example, if you made changes in `tfhe/src/integer/*`:
>  * replace, in `test_integer` target, the filter `-- integer::` by `-- my_new_test`
>  * run `make test_integer`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

For example, if you made changes in `tfhe/src/integer/*`,  you can test them with the following steps:
 1. In `test_integer` target, replace the filter `-- integer::` by `-- my_new_test`.
 2. Run `make test_integer`.
```

## 4. Committing

> **TFHE-rs** follows conventional commit specification to have a consistent commit naming scheme and you are expected to follow it as well.
> 
> This is a mandatory requirement for Semantic Versioning ([https://semver.org/](https://semver.org/)) used in **TFHE-rs** release process to define the version number and create automatically meaningful changelog.
> 
> Just a reminder that commit messages are checked automatically in the CI and are rejected if they don't follow the rules. To learn more about conventional commits, check [this page](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/).
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

**TFHE-rs** follows the conventional commit specification to maintain a consistent commit history, essential for Semantic Versioning ([semver.org](https://semver.org/)). 

Commit messages are automatically checked in CI and will be rejected if they do not comply, so make sure that you follow the commit conventions detailed on [this page]
(https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/).

```

## 5. Rebasing

You should rebase on top of the repository's `main` branch before you create your pull request. Merge commits are not allowed, so rebasing on `main` before pushing gives you the best chance of to avoid rewriting parts of your PR later if conflicts arise with other PRs being merged.

> ## 6. Open a pull-request

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## 6. Openning a Pill Request
```

> You can now open a pull-request. For more details on how to do so from a forked repository, please read GitHub's [official documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request-from-a-fork) on the subject.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once your changes are ready, open a pull request. 

For instructions on creating a PR from a fork, refer to GitHub's [official documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request-from-a-fork).
```

> ## 7. Continuous Integration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## 7. Continuous integration
```

    CI-pipeline -->> GitHub: Send checks results
    Reviewer -->> GitHub: Merge if pipeline green
```

> [!Note]
>Useful details:
>* pipeline is triggered by humans
>* review team is located in Paris timezone, pipeline launch will most likely happen during office hours
>* direct changes to CI related files are not allowed for external contributors
>* run `make pcc` to fix any build errors before pushing commits

## 8. Data versioning

Data serialized with **TFHE-rs** should be backward compatible. This is done with the [tfhe-versionable](https://crates.io/crates/tfhe-versionable) crate.
If you modify a type that derives `Versionize` in a way that is not backward compatible, you should add an upgrade to that type.

For example, these changes are data breaking:
- Adding a field to a struct,
- changing the order of the fields within a struct or the variants within an enum,
- renaming a field of a struct or a variant of an enum,
- changing the type of field in a struct or a variant in an enum.

On the contrary, these changes are *not* data breaking:
- Renaming a type (though if it implements the `Named` trait, it can be),
- adding a variant to the end of an enum

> Here is a quick example of how to do this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Example: adding a field
```

> For example, these changes are data breaking:
> - Adding a field to a struct,
> - changing the order of the fields within a struct or the variants within an enum,
> - renaming a field of a struct or a variant of an enum,
> - changing the type of field in a struct or a variant in an enum.
> 
> On the contrary, these changes are *not* data breaking:
> - Renaming a type (though if it implements the `Named` trait, it can be),
> - adding a variant to the end of an enum
> 
> Here is a quick example of how to do this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, these changes are data breaking:
- Adding a field to a struct.
- Changing the order of the fields within a struct or the variants within an enum.
- Renaming a field of a struct or a variant of an enum.
- Changing the type of field in a struct or a variant in an enum.

On the contrary, these changes are *not* data breaking:
- Renaming a type (unless it implements the `Named` trait).
- Adding a variant to the end of an enum.

Here is a quick example of how to do this.
```

> Suppose you want to add a new i32 field to a type named `MyType`.
> 
> For example, you want to change this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Suppose you want to add an i32 field to a type named `MyType`. The original type is defined as:
```

```rust
#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize, Versionize)]
#[versionize(MyTypeVersions)]
struct MyType {
  val: u64,
}
```

> into this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And you want to change it to:
```

```rust
#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize, Versionize)]
#[versionize(MyTypeVersions)]
struct MyType {
  val: u64,
  other_val: i32
}
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Follow these steps:
```

1. Navigate to the definition of the dispatch enum of this type. This is the type inside the `#[versionize(MyTypeVersions)]` macro attribute. In general, this type has the same name as the base type with a `Versions` suffix. You should find something like

```rust
#[derive(VersionsDispatch)]
enum MyTypeVersions {
  V0(MyTypeV0),
  V1(MyType)
}
```

2. Add a new variant to the enum to preserve the previous version of the type. You can simply copy and paste the previous definition of the type and add a version suffix:

```rust
#[derive(Version)]
struct MyTypeV1 {
  val: u64,
}

#[derive(VersionsDispatch)]
enum MyTypeVersions {
  V0(MyTypeV0),
  V1(MyTypeV1),
  V2(MyType) // Here this points to your modified type
}
```

3. Implement the `Upgrade` trait to define how we should go from the previous version to the current version:
```rust
impl Upgrade<MyType> for MyTypeV1 {
  type Error = Infallible;

   fn upgrade(self) -> Result<MyType, Self::Error> {
       Ok(MyType {
           val: self.val,
           other_val: 0
        })
   }
}
```

> 4. fix the upgrade target of the previous version. In this example, `impl Upgrade<MyType> for MyTypeV0 {` should simply be changed to `impl Upgrade<MyTypeV1> for MyTypeV0 {`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Fix the upgrade target of the previous version. In this example, `impl Upgrade<MyType> for MyTypeV0 {` should simply be changed to `impl Upgrade<MyTypeV1> for MyTypeV0 {`
```
